INSTALL.rst, before:

Don't worry, Telemeta is easy to setup as any other Django app !

-----------------
Requirements
-----------------

Telemeta is designed to run on Linux and other UNIX based architectures.
It depends on several python librairies like Django (version >= 1.3.1).
See http://djangoproject.com.

Other needed librairies are listed below.


Install the system dependencies
--------------------------------

* On Debian (Squeeze recommended) or Ubuntu Lucid:

    Install all dependencies like this::

        sudo aptitude install python python-dev python-django python-xml python-mysqldb mysql-server \
            python-ctypes python-setuptools python-support python-docutils \
            python-libxml2 python-django-registration python-lxml python-numpy \
            python-scipy python-imaging python-mutagen python-gobject python-gst0.10 \
            gstreamer0.10-plugins-base gobject-introspection python-django-south
            python-pip gir1.0-gstreamer-0.10 gstreamer0.10-plugins-good gstreamer0.10-plugins-bad

    To get non-free (MP3, MP4, AAC, etc) decoding and encoding features, add Debian Multimedia repository and install the modules::

        echo "deb http://www.deb-multimedia.org stable main non-free" | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list
        sudo apt-get update
        sudo apt-get install gstreamer0.10-lame gstreamer0.10-plugins-really-bad gstreamer0.10-plugins-ugly

* On other linux platforms:

    Please install all the equivalent dependencies thanks to your application manager or manually.


Install Telemeta
-----------------------------

Pip method (highly recommended!)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

We strongly advise you use the python package tool as it installs some good dependencies automatically::

    sudo pip install telemeta

or (deprecated)::

    sudo easy_install telemeta

From sources
+++++++++++++
Download the latest tar archive at http://telemeta.org.

Uncompress and install it. For example::

    tar xzf telemeta-1.0.tar.gz
    cd telemeta-1.0
    sudo python setup.py install

Libraries
+++++++++++

All those modules have been automatically installed if you used one of the previous methods to install Telemeta.
In this case only, you can PASS this stage.

But, if you need to hack Telemeta without installing it (i.e. link it through your $PYTHONPATH), you need to install those libraries manually.

TimeSide (web audio components)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I should be install with the pip method, otherwise install it manually::

    sudo pip install timeside

Or, download the last archive at :
http://code.google.com/p/timeside/downloads/list

Uncompress it and read README and INSTALL to install the dependencies
and then the module.

JSON-RPC server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install it using pip::

    sudo pip install django-json-rpc

or, from source::

    git clone git://github.com/samuraisam/django-json-rpc.git
    cd django-json-rpc
    python setup.py install

South (schema migration)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is strongly advised to use South and then enable data schema migrations between the models and the database.
It will allow automatic DB updates when your / our models are modified. Because the first one you use is not only the best one...

Install it using pip::

    sudo pip install south

or::

    sudo easy_install South


-------------------------
Fast testing (sandbox)
-------------------------

If you just want to test Telemeta just now, a sandbox is available in the example/ directory::

    cd example/sandbox
    ./manage.py syncdb
    ./manage.py migrate
    ./manage.py runserver 9000

Now browse http://localhost:9000

-------------------------------
Create a new Telemeta project
-------------------------------

Start your project
------------------

For example::

    cd ~/my_projects
    django-admin startproject mysite


Create the database
------------------------

Telemeta needs MySQL to work well and fast. So you need to create a MySQL database before trying it.
But you can also use SQLite, PostgreSQL or Oracle DB.


Configure the telemeta project
----------------------------------

Edit the file settings.py in a text editor.
Modifiy the following variables::

    ADMINS =            telemeta requires that you indicate an administrator here
    DATABASES =         your database setting dict (don't forget to create the database if needed)
    MEDIA_ROOT =        absolute path to the media directory you just created

Set the app lists as follow::

    INSTALLED_APPS = (
    'django.contrib.auth',
    'django.contrib.contenttypes',
    'django.contrib.sessions',
    'django.contrib.sites',
    'django.contrib.messages',
    'django.contrib.admin',
    'telemeta',
    'timeside',
    'jsonrpc',
    'south',
    'sorl.thumbnail',
    )

Set the following languages::

    LANGUAGES = [ ('fr', 'French'),
                  ('en', 'English'),
    ]


Set the following Middlewares::

    MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES = (
        'django.middleware.common.CommonMiddleware',
        'django.contrib.sessions.middleware.SessionMiddleware',
        'django.middleware.csrf.CsrfViewMiddleware',
        'django.contrib.auth.middleware.AuthenticationMiddleware',
        'django.contrib.messages.middleware.MessageMiddleware',
        'django.middleware.locale.LocaleMiddleware',
    )

and the following processors::

    TEMPLATE_CONTEXT_PROCESSORS = (
        'django.core.context_processors.request',
        'django.contrib.auth.context_processors.auth',
        'django.core.context_processors.i18n',
        'django.core.context_processors.media',
        'django.core.context_processors.static',)

Add the following variables::

    TELEMETA_ORGANIZATION = "foo.org"                 # name of the organization which hosts this installation
    TELEMETA_SUBJECTS = ""                            # tuple of subject keywords (used for Dublin Core), such as "Ethnology", etc...
    TELEMETA_DESCRIPTION = 'foo sound database'       # the description of the site
    TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR = MEDIA_ROOT + 'foo_cache/'    # absolute path to the cache directory that you just created
    TELEMETA_GMAP_KEY = ''                            # your Google Map API key
    TELEMETA_DOWNLOAD_ENABLED = True                  # True to enable raw audio data download
    TELEMETA_STREAMING_FORMATS = ('mp3', 'ogg')       # tuple of authorized streaming formats. Ex: ('mp3', 'ogg')
    TELEMETA_DOWNLOAD_FORMATS = ('wav', 'mp3', 'ogg') # tuple of authorized download formats. Ex: ('wav', 'mp3', 'webm')
    TELEMETA_PUBLIC_ACCESS_PERIOD = 0                 # number of years above which item files are automagically published
    EMAIL_HOST = 'localhost'                          # your default SMTP server
    DEFAULT_FROM_EMAIL = 'root@localhost'             # the default sending email address

Just paste the lines below::

    LOGIN_URL = '/login'
    LOGIN_REDIRECT_URL = '/'
    AUTH_PROFILE_MODULE = 'telemeta.userprofile'
    TELEMETA_EXPORT_CACHE_DIR = TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR + "/export"
    TELEMETA_DATA_CACHE_DIR = TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR + "/data"
    CACHE_BACKEND = "file://" + TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR + "/data"

Optional: if you want some personal templates, for example::

    TEMPLATE_DIRS = (
    '/home/dev/telemeta/sandboxes/sandbox_generic/templates/',
    )

You can find an example for settings.py there::

    example/sandbox/settings.py


Configure your urls
----------------------

Add this dictionary to get Javascript translation::

    js_info_dict = {
        'packages': ('telemeta',),
    }

The simplest case is to have telemeta running at public root. To do so, add this url in urls.py::

    # Telemeta
    (r'^', include('telemeta.urls')),

    # Languages
    (r'^i18n/', include('django.conf.urls.i18n')),
    (r'^jsi18n/$', 'django.views.i18n.javascript_catalog', js_info_dict),

You should also bring the django admin::

    (r'^admin/', include(admin.site.urls)),

Please also uncomment::

    from django.contrib import admin
    admin.autodiscover()

You can find an example for url.py there::

    example/sandbox/urls.py


Initialize the database
--------------------------

This synchronizes the DB with the model::

    ./manage.py syncdb

If you want tu use the data schema migration system (South needed, see previous paragraph)::

    ./manage.py migrate telemeta
    ./manage.py collectstatic


Start the project
--------------------

We are ready to start the telemeta server::

    python manage.py runserver

By default, the server starts on the port 8000. You can override this with, for example::

    python manage.py runserver 9000

To get it on your network interface::

    python manage.py runserver 192.168.0.10:9000


Test it
-----------

Go to this URL with your browser::

    http://localhost:8000

or::

    http://localhost:9000

or::

    http://192.168.0.10:9000


Configure the site domain name in admin > general admin > sites

Test it and enjoy it !


--------------------------
Template customization
--------------------------

Please see ::

    http://telemeta.org/wiki/InterfaceCustomization


--------------------------
Deploy it with Apache 2
--------------------------

If you want to use Telemeta through a web server, it is highly recommended to use Apache 2
with the mod_wsgi module as explained in the following page ::

    http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.1/howto/deployment/modwsgi/#howto-deployment-modwsgi

This will prevent Apache to put some audio data in the cache memory as it is usually the case with mod_python.

You can find an example of an Apache2 VirtualHost conf file there::

    example/apache2/telemeta.conf


-------------------------
IP based authorization
-------------------------

It is possible to login automatically an IP range of machines to Telemeta thanks to the django-ipauth module::

    sudo pip install django-ipauth

See http://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-ipauth/ for setup.


----------------------------
Import ISO 639-3 languages
----------------------------

From Telemeta 1.4, an ISO 639-3 language model has been implemented.

The ISO language table content can be initialized with the official code set.
Here is a import example where telemeta_crem5 is the SQL database::

    wget http://www.sil.org/iso639-3/iso-639-3_20110525.tab
    mysql -u root -p
    load data infile 'iso-639-3_20110525.tab' into table telemeta_crem5.languages CHARACTER SET UTF8 ignore 1 lines (identifier, part2B, part2T, part1, scope, type, name, comment);

If you upgraded Telemeta from a version previous or equal to 1.3, please update the media_items table as follow::

    mysql -u root -p
    use telemeta_crem5
    ALTER TABLE media_items ADD COLUMN 'language_iso_id' integer;
    ALTER TABLE 'media_items' ADD CONSTRAINT 'language_iso_id_refs_id_80b221' FOREIGN KEY ('language_iso_id') REFERENCES 'languages' ('id');

-------------------------
Contact / More infos
-------------------------

See README.rst and http://telemeta.org.

Commit message:

telemeta/models/media.py: add TELEMETA_MEDIA_DIR

INSTALL.rst, after:

Don't worry, Telemeta is easy to setup as any other Django app !

-----------------
Requirements
-----------------

Telemeta is designed to run on Linux and other UNIX based architectures.
It depends on several python librairies like Django (version >= 1.3.1).
See http://djangoproject.com.

Other needed librairies are listed below.


Install the system dependencies
--------------------------------

* On Debian (Squeeze recommended) or Ubuntu Lucid:

    Install all dependencies like this::

        sudo aptitude install python python-dev python-django python-xml python-mysqldb mysql-server \
            python-ctypes python-setuptools python-support python-docutils \
            python-libxml2 python-django-registration python-lxml python-numpy \
            python-scipy python-imaging python-mutagen python-gobject python-gst0.10 \
            gstreamer0.10-plugins-base gobject-introspection python-django-south
            python-pip gir1.0-gstreamer-0.10 gstreamer0.10-plugins-good gstreamer0.10-plugins-bad

    To get non-free (MP3, MP4, AAC, etc) decoding and encoding features, add Debian Multimedia repository and install the modules::

        echo "deb http://www.deb-multimedia.org stable main non-free" | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list
        sudo apt-get update
        sudo apt-get install gstreamer0.10-lame gstreamer0.10-plugins-really-bad gstreamer0.10-plugins-ugly

* On other linux platforms:

    Please install all the equivalent dependencies thanks to your application manager or manually.


Install Telemeta
-----------------------------

Pip method (highly recommended!)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

We strongly advise you use the python package tool as it installs some good dependencies automatically::

    sudo pip install telemeta

or (deprecated)::

    sudo easy_install telemeta

From sources
+++++++++++++
Download the latest tar archive at http://telemeta.org.

Uncompress and install it. For example::

    tar xzf telemeta-1.0.tar.gz
    cd telemeta-1.0
    sudo python setup.py install

Libraries
+++++++++++

All those modules have been automatically installed if you used one of the previous methods to install Telemeta.
In this case only, you can PASS this stage.

But, if you need to hack Telemeta without installing it (i.e. link it through your $PYTHONPATH), you need to install those libraries manually.

TimeSide (web audio components)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I should be install with the pip method, otherwise install it manually::

    sudo pip install timeside

Or, download the last archive at :
http://code.google.com/p/timeside/downloads/list

Uncompress it and read README and INSTALL to install the dependencies
and then the module.

JSON-RPC server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install it using pip::

    sudo pip install django-json-rpc

or, from source::

    git clone git://github.com/samuraisam/django-json-rpc.git
    cd django-json-rpc
    python setup.py install

South (schema migration)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is strongly advised to use South and then enable data schema migrations between the models and the database.
It will allow automatic DB updates when your / our models are modified. Because the first one you use is not only the best one...

Install it using pip::

    sudo pip install south

or::

    sudo easy_install South


-------------------------
Fast testing (sandbox)
-------------------------

If you just want to test Telemeta just now, a sandbox is available in the example/ directory::

    cd example/sandbox
    ./manage.py syncdb
    ./manage.py migrate
    ./manage.py runserver 9000

Now browse http://localhost:9000

-------------------------------
Create a new Telemeta project
-------------------------------

Start your project
------------------

For example::

    cd ~/my_projects
    django-admin startproject mysite


Create the database
------------------------

Telemeta needs MySQL to work well and fast. So you need to create a MySQL database before trying it.
But you can also use SQLite, PostgreSQL or Oracle DB.


Configure the telemeta project
----------------------------------

Edit the file settings.py in a text editor.
Modifiy the following variables::

    ADMINS =            telemeta requires that you indicate an administrator here
    DATABASES =         your database setting dict (don't forget to create the database if needed)
    MEDIA_ROOT =        absolute path to the media directory you just created

Set the app lists as follow::

    INSTALLED_APPS = (
    'django.contrib.auth',
    'django.contrib.contenttypes',
    'django.contrib.sessions',
    'django.contrib.sites',
    'django.contrib.messages',
    'django.contrib.admin',
    'telemeta',
    'timeside',
    'jsonrpc',
    'south',
    'sorl.thumbnail',
    )

Set the following languages::

    LANGUAGES = [ ('fr', 'French'),
                  ('en', 'English'),
    ]


Set the following Middlewares::

    MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES = (
        'django.middleware.common.CommonMiddleware',
        'django.contrib.sessions.middleware.SessionMiddleware',
        'django.middleware.csrf.CsrfViewMiddleware',
        'django.contrib.auth.middleware.AuthenticationMiddleware',
        'django.contrib.messages.middleware.MessageMiddleware',
        'django.middleware.locale.LocaleMiddleware',
    )

and the following processors::

    TEMPLATE_CONTEXT_PROCESSORS = (
        'django.core.context_processors.request',
        'django.contrib.auth.context_processors.auth',
        'django.core.context_processors.i18n',
        'django.core.context_processors.media',
        'django.core.context_processors.static',)

Add the following variables::

    TELEMETA_ORGANIZATION = "foo.org"                 # name of the organization which hosts this installation
    TELEMETA_SUBJECTS = ""                            # tuple of subject keywords (used for Dublin Core), such as "Ethnology", etc...
    TELEMETA_DESCRIPTION = 'foo sound database'       # the description of the site
    TELEMETA_MEDIA_DIR = MEDIA_ROOT + 'foo_media/'    # the path where media files will be imported
    TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR = MEDIA_ROOT + 'foo_cache/'    # absolute path to the cache directory that you just created
    TELEMETA_GMAP_KEY = ''                            # your Google Map API key
    TELEMETA_DOWNLOAD_ENABLED = True                  # True to enable raw audio data download
    TELEMETA_STREAMING_FORMATS = ('mp3', 'ogg')       # tuple of authorized streaming formats. Ex: ('mp3', 'ogg')
    TELEMETA_DOWNLOAD_FORMATS = ('wav', 'mp3', 'ogg') # tuple of authorized download formats. Ex: ('wav', 'mp3', 'webm')
    TELEMETA_PUBLIC_ACCESS_PERIOD = 0                 # number of years above which item files are automagically published
    EMAIL_HOST = 'localhost'                          # your default SMTP server
    DEFAULT_FROM_EMAIL = 'root@localhost'             # the default sending email address

Just paste the lines below::

    LOGIN_URL = '/login'
    LOGIN_REDIRECT_URL = '/'
    AUTH_PROFILE_MODULE = 'telemeta.userprofile'
    TELEMETA_EXPORT_CACHE_DIR = TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR + "/export"
    TELEMETA_DATA_CACHE_DIR = TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR + "/data"
    CACHE_BACKEND = "file://" + TELEMETA_CACHE_DIR + "/data"

Optional: if you want some personal templates, for example::

    TEMPLATE_DIRS = (
    '/home/dev/telemeta/sandboxes/sandbox_generic/templates/',
    )

You can find an example for settings.py there::

    example/sandbox/settings.py


Configure your urls
----------------------

Add this dictionary to get Javascript translation::

    js_info_dict = {
        'packages': ('telemeta',),
    }

The simplest case is to have telemeta running at public root. To do so, add this url in urls.py::

    # Telemeta
    (r'^', include('telemeta.urls')),

    # Languages
    (r'^i18n/', include('django.conf.urls.i18n')),
    (r'^jsi18n/$', 'django.views.i18n.javascript_catalog', js_info_dict),

You should also bring the django admin::

    (r'^admin/', include(admin.site.urls)),

Please also uncomment::

    from django.contrib import admin
    admin.autodiscover()

You can find an example for url.py there::

    example/sandbox/urls.py


Initialize the database
--------------------------

This synchronizes the DB with the model::

    ./manage.py syncdb

If you want tu use the data schema migration system (South needed, see previous paragraph)::

    ./manage.py migrate telemeta
    ./manage.py collectstatic


Start the project
--------------------

We are ready to start the telemeta server::

    python manage.py runserver

By default, the server starts on the port 8000. You can override this with, for example::

    python manage.py runserver 9000

To get it on your network interface::

    python manage.py runserver 192.168.0.10:9000


Test it
-----------

Go to this URL with your browser::

    http://localhost:8000

or::

    http://localhost:9000

or::

    http://192.168.0.10:9000


Configure the site domain name in admin > general admin > sites

Test it and enjoy it !


--------------------------
Template customization
--------------------------

Please see ::

    http://telemeta.org/wiki/InterfaceCustomization


--------------------------
Deploy it with Apache 2
--------------------------

If you want to use Telemeta through a web server, it is highly recommended to use Apache 2
with the mod_wsgi module as explained in the following page ::

    http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.1/howto/deployment/modwsgi/#howto-deployment-modwsgi

This will prevent Apache to put some audio data in the cache memory as it is usually the case with mod_python.

You can find an example of an Apache2 VirtualHost conf file there::

    example/apache2/telemeta.conf


-------------------------
IP based authorization
-------------------------

It is possible to login automatically an IP range of machines to Telemeta thanks to the django-ipauth module::

    sudo pip install django-ipauth

See http://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-ipauth/ for setup.


----------------------------
Import ISO 639-3 languages
----------------------------

From Telemeta 1.4, an ISO 639-3 language model has been implemented.

The ISO language table content can be initialized with the official code set.
Here is a import example where telemeta_crem5 is the SQL database::

    wget http://www.sil.org/iso639-3/iso-639-3_20110525.tab
    mysql -u root -p
    load data infile 'iso-639-3_20110525.tab' into table telemeta_crem5.languages CHARACTER SET UTF8 ignore 1 lines (identifier, part2B, part2T, part1, scope, type, name, comment);

If you upgraded Telemeta from a version previous or equal to 1.3, please update the media_items table as follow::

    mysql -u root -p
    use telemeta_crem5
    ALTER TABLE media_items ADD COLUMN 'language_iso_id' integer;
    ALTER TABLE 'media_items' ADD CONSTRAINT 'language_iso_id_refs_id_80b221' FOREIGN KEY ('language_iso_id') REFERENCES 'languages' ('id');

-------------------------
Contact / More infos
-------------------------

See README.rst and http://telemeta.org.
